*Ralstonia eutropha H16* RBA model
================
Michael Jahn,
2020-04-28

***

This resource balance analysis (RBA) model was generated using the [RBApy package from Bulovic et al.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymben.2019.06.001),
using a manually curated metabolic reconstruction originally developed by [Park et al., 2011](http://bmcsystbiol.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/1752-0509-5-101). The original model was refactored and many reactions were curated and harmonized to community standards as e.g. available through the [Bigg model database](bigg.ucsd.edu/). The genome scale model that serves as base for the RBA model is maintained on [github.com/m-jahn/](https://github.com/m-jahn/genome-scale-models).

Sources for parameter estimation are:

 - [Goelzer at al., 2015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymben.2015.10.003): set of parameters for transcription, translation, and other fundamental cellular functions.
 - [Park et al., 2011](http://bmcsystbiol.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/1752-0509-5-101) for the cell composition of *R. eutropha* (original biomass equation)


## Generation of the XML model

The *Ralstonia eutropha H16* RBA model was generated in a step-wise manner,
based on information from a hand-curated model.


### Step 1: Generation of a default model

For initial creation of the RBA model, the following input files were used. The fasta file headers have to be formatted according to this pattern: `rba|id|name|set_name|stoichiometry`.

 - `data/sbml.xml`: metabolic netwok from the hand-curated model. Some minor modifications were made to make it fit before RBA model construction (see `generate_model.py`). For example, empty gene associations were replaced with `UNKNOWN` to prevent RBA reading those reactions as spontaneous.
 - `data/ribosome.fasta`: composition of ribosome (rRNA and proteins). rRNA sequences were retrieved from NCBI, ribosomal protein sequence and subunit structure from uniprot. 68 ribosomal proteins were included. Ribosomal stoichiometry was assumed to be one subunit each for 30S and 50S subunits, except for L7/L12 that forms 2-4 dimers per ribosome (`n >= 4`). *TODO: update stochiometry for elongation and initiation factors.*
 - `data/chaperones.fasta`: composition of molecular machines involved in protein folding. These include the protein subunits `groES`, `groEL`, `dnaJ`, `dnaK`, `grpE`, `trigger factor tig`, `htpG`, and `hfq` with their respective number od subunits obtained from uniprot.
 - `data/trnas.fasta`: composition of tRNAs. tRNA sequences were retrieved from NCBI, and only one representative tRNA (the first) per amino acid was used (20 out of 61 tRNAs).
 - `params.in`: pipeline parameters.

The initial RBApy model generation was performed via the following customized function. The function automatically applies custom changes to the SBML model, imports the `params.in` file with basic settings, and generates the model files.

```
python generate_model.py
```

### Step 2: Generation of a model improved through helper files

This first run downloaded `data/uniprot.csv`, generated helper files `data/*.tsv`, and generated a first XML model. The following modifications were then made to helper files.

 - `location_map.tsv`: the uniprot compartment names were mapped to generic names (such as `Cytoplasm`)
 - `metabolites.tsv`: this table contains target metabolite concentrations for basic biomolecules and cofactors (for example `ATP`, `dATP`, `thiamin`, and so on). Molecules that are already contained in macrocomponents were set to zero. One exception are some nucleotide species that are present in more detail compared to macrocomponent reactions.
 - `macrocomponents.tsv`: This table was supplemented with all major cell components (`RNA`, `DNA`, `PEPTIDOGLYCAN`, and so on) and corresponding target concentrations from the original model's biomass equation
 - `medium.tsv`: added new minimal medium.
 - `subunits.tsv`: updated some protein stoichiometries (ATP synthase).
 - `unknown_proteins.tsv`: (empty) the SBML model contains no genes that could not be mapped


### Step 3: Generate and solve full model

In the last step, the full model can be generated by running one more iteration of:
```
python generate_model.py
```

The model can then be solved by running:

```
python solve_rba_model.py .
```

### Step 4: Interpretation of results

To be added.
